Cape Town - After the murders of two former Beacon Hill High School pupils, the school has decided to tighten security in and around its premises. Police spokesperson Joseph Swartbooi said the murders were under investigation. He said Mitchells Plain police attended to the first complaint on Thursday. “Upon arrival at the address in Palestina Street, at around 4.35pm, they found the body of an 18-year-old male who sustained multiple gunshot wounds to his body.  “The victim was declared deceased on the scene by the medical personnel,” Swartbooi said. The shooting of Wakeel Dreyer took place just a day before he was to receive his matric results. It is reported that he was shot 17 times while at a tuck shop. Swartbooi said a man was arrested and was expected to appear in the Mitchells Plain Magistrates Court on Monday. On Saturday, police attended to a second incident, at about 10.23am, in Austin Crescent, Beacon Valley, Mitchell’s Plain in which former matric pupil Ridhaa Adonis was killed. “Preliminary investigation suggests that the 19-year-old victim was at a shop situated in the mentioned street when the suspect accosted him.  “The suspect allegedly fired several shots at the victim who sustained multiple fatal injuries to his upper body, which he succumbed to on the scene,” Swartbooi said. In correspondence sent to parents, acting principal Melisha Benjamin said the deaths had saddened the entire Beacon Hill community. “Beacon Hill’s (school) management is fully aware of the rumours going around and the messages circulating on social media. “We acknowledge that you and your children are in fear because of these messages and understand that you may not want to send them to school. “After receiving the first message on Saturday morning, management immediately contacted Safer Schools, SAPS, the circuit manager, and the SGB of the school.” Benjamin said police confirmed their presence at the school in the mornings and afternoons, patrolling inside and outside the premises. Law enforcement has also been deployed at the school since Monday. Benjamin said the school would operate as usual. City Law Enforcement spokesperson Wayne Dyason confirmed that officers would be at the school this week to ensure stability. Spokesperson to Education MEC, Kerry Mauchline said the measures were taken to alleviate fears created on social media, and that there had been no direct threats targeting learners.  Mauchline said police and law enforcement were present from 7:30am on Monday. “We have requested that they do visible patrolling around the school in the mornings and in the afternoons when learners are dismissed from school.  “Law enforcement will deploy three officers to be stationed at the school for the next two weeks (when they will assess if further support is needed). This is to assist with patrols and access control.” Police have appealed to anyone with information to contact the investigating officer or Crime Stop anonymously on 08600 10111. shakirah.thebus@inl.co.za Cape Argus