Johannesburg - The festive season is a time to be joyful and laid-back after a year of hard work. But the downside to this is that lives are lost during this time especially when it comes to the consumption of alcohol and drugs. Afro-pop artist Lulama Gxowa, known as Lulama K, wants to make a difference in South African society. He has teamed with actor Sthembiso “SK” Khoza to raise awareness about substance abuse.  With the festive season in full swing, this is the time for some young people to have fun and relax while others will be overdoing various activities and ultimately putting themselves in danger. Born in the Eastern Cape and having grown up in Khayelitsha, Lulama K said he saw it fit to do a collaboration titled “Alcohol and Hubbly” with multiaward-winning actor Sthembiso “SK” Khoza, who is famously known as Shaka in the telenovela “The Queen”. Gxowa, 38, a qualified IT developer who graduated from the Cape Peninsula University of Technology, said he knew the excitement that came with being at home as a student and with siblings during this time, and he thought it was important to warn people about the dangers that come with the abuse of alcohol and other substances, and also how young people especially women are likely to fall victim to gender-based violence (GBV). Gxowa said he met Khoza at an event in Mpumalanga. “We happened to travel together to the gig and we spoke. We struck up a friendship and I told him I wanted to work on a song with a particular message about our relationship with alcohol as people. I wanted to warn the youth with this song.” The pair linked up in the studio about a month ago and created “Alcohol and Hubbly”. Gxowa said he had the youth in mind when working on the song. “We, as artists always see things happen as we’re always at events and gigs. Young people are always up and about, where their safety is of little concern to them. We wanted to be specific and strategic with the direction and message of the song, coming up with a memorable hook. This is part of a bigger project,” he said. He is currently working on his EP which he aims to release early next year. “It is important that we use our platform as artists to educate and make a difference where we can. I’ll be tackling various issues through my music that will resonate with the people of my community. SK and I have shared ideas about teaming up with other artists to start a campaign through music,” he said.