Durban - Political analysts and student organisations have slammed the Department of Education (DoE) for the “late” release of the final matric results, saying it impacted on the registration processes at universities and colleges.  Registration at universities began on January 16, before the release of matric results, and was expected to close on February 20.  The Congress of South African Students (Cosas) said it had noted with concern the continuing distance between the departments of basic and higher education.  Cosas secretary-general Bongani Ndlovu asked why matric results were announced six days after universities and colleges had commenced with registration. “We demand that all higher institutions grant the matriculants more time to enrol and register for courses of their choice,” said Ndlovu.  He also said the release of the Independent Examinations Board (IEB) senior certificate results before the National Senior Certificate (NSC), spoke directly to the ‘inequalities faced within the basic education sector’. He said Cosas was of the view that private schools should be nationalised.  Political analyst Lukhona Mnguni thought it was “strange” for schools to open before the matric results had been released. “Things are gradually becoming stranger in this country, and we must just accept them because the mediocrity is fully institutionalised, so it can’t even be excused. We must just live with it,” said Mnguni.  He said in some universities teaching got delayed because of the ‘tedious task’ of admissions and sorting out enrolment. “The sooner universities start the process of registration, the better,” Mnguni said. DoE spokesperson Elijah Mhlanga said the decision to release the matric results ‘late’ was taken together with universities.  “The Covid-19 pandemic had affected learning for the past two years. In 2021 and 2022 results were released around the same period, as we fought the ripple effects of the pandemic within these years, which disturbed and delayed the start of learning and exams. This further trickled down to administrative processes as well,” said Mhlanga.  The CEO of Universities of South Africa (USAf), Dr Phethiwe Matutu, said universities were ready to host the 2023 cohort of first-year students. “Universities are cognisant that there might be challenges during the registration period, but they will follow their set systems to ensure efficiency with the start of the 2023 academic year,” Matutu said.  She said in November, USAf, together with the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS), the Department of Higher Education and Training (DHET) and the South African Union of Students (SAUS) met to strategise on how to address challenges that may disrupt the start of the academic year. Matutu said the post-school and training sector catered for pupils who did not qualify for university admission.  “Those students can look towards the Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) colleges, which have proven to be viable options and are equipped to provide necessary education and training. “Alternatively, these students can apply for an Exemption Certificate through the Matriculation Board, provided that they meet the minimum requirements.  This certificate enables applicants to gain entry towards a degree qualification at a university or private institution,” said Matutu. She said funding remained a huge problem for students and universities. “We do have NSFAS, although with a limited budget.  Students can enquire with their respective institutions on the processes to be followed when applying for NSFAS financial aid. Not only that, but they can find out which other organisations are offering bursaries and scholarships they can apply for,” said Matutu.  Higher Education and Training Minister Dr Blade Nzimande assured prospective students that the delayed release of the results would not affect the state of readiness for the Post School Education and Training (PSET).  “There are several universities that will allow late registrations,” said Nzimande. He advised prospective students to liaise with the universities of their choice, adding that most TVET colleges had commenced with their teaching, including practicals, following a successful online registration process. SUNDAY TRIBUNE