Durban - The Amajuba Municipality is delighted at producing  one of the country’s top Grade 12 Top achievers in the 2022 matric exams - Sinakhokonke Siyaya from Phendukani High School in Madadeni Section 6. Municipality spokesperson Nondu Mhlungu, said that the district joined Phendukani High School in celebrating Siyaya’s achievement. “Sinakhokonke Siyaya has flown the flag of Amajuba District high obtaining 8 distinctions and placed second under (Quintile 4) schools at a national level,”she said. Speaking to Newsroom Africa in a video interview on Monday,  Sinakhokonke said she planned to become an oncologist and be the first person to find a cure for cancer. She thanked her teachers and parents for contributing to her success including getting 100% in two subjects. “I got eight distinctions, 100% in Accounting and Life Orientation, 99% for Physics, 98% for Maths. I don't remember the others but its eight out of eight distinctions…It feels so amazing to be acknowledged because I came out second in nationals, third in KZN, first in Amajuba,” she said. Mhlungu said Mayor uMntwana Ndabuko Zulu and the Speaker of the Council, uMntwana S.O Zulu were invited to a celebration assembly honouring Siyaya’s achievement hosted by the school on Monday. The mayor congratulated Sinakhokonke on her outstanding achievements. Zulu highlighted the important role she had played in positioning Amajuba as one of the top districts in the Northern Kwazulu Natal. He also encouraged the class of 2023 and the entire school to follow in Sinakhokonke’s footsteps, and applauded the educators and school principal for the exceptional job they were doing to groom the next generation of leaders. Mhlungu said the mayor presented congratulatory gifts to both Siyaya and Nokwethemba Mashaba who came 2nd in the province. She said Zulu hoped the gifts will boost the two achievers as they start their university education Zulu said he looked forward to meeting the Top 10 achievers at the annual Grade 12 Mayoral Excellence Awards. Mhlungu said the date of the awards will soon be announced. THE MERCURY