Durban – The KwaZulu-Natal Department of Correctional Services and the Department of Education will be announcing the KZN 2022 offenders’ matric results at the Westville correctional services centre on Tuesday. Education MEC Mbali Frazer will be accompanied by the KZN correctional Regional Commissioner Mnikelwa Nxele when she announces the offenders' matric results. The departments said uSethubeni Youth School was among the best-performing correctional services schools in the country. “The KwaZulu-Natal region has recorded yet another outstanding performance for the class of 2022 academic year following a consecutive 100% pass achievement for the 7th time by uSethubeni Youth School.”  For its good academic performance, Minister for Justice and Correctional Services had awarded KZN a Minister’s Award for the best performing region.  “Almost all schools in the region achieved bachelor passes,” said the departments. The department added that this success enjoyed by the region is as a result of different support systems and partnerships. Education department spokesperson Muzi Mahlambi said there would be a prize giving for the offenders who had done well. Meanwhile, IOL reported that this week the portfolio committee on basic education is expected to begin its week-long visit to KZN to assess the readiness of schools as the 2023 academic year rolls out.  The committee chairperson Bongiwe Mbinqo-Gigaba said the oversight visit will assess the academic readiness in the province. “The ability of the system to roll out the academic year is dependent on adequate preparedness, the availability of learning and teaching support materials, adequacy and availability of learner transport, the effectiveness of governance structures such as school governing bodies at schools, adequate support by district and circuit offices.  “We will assess those multiplicities of issues to ascertain readiness,” said Mbinqo-Gigaba. The committee is set to visit three educational districts in the province including Zululand, Harry Gwala, and King Cetshwayo. THE MERCURY