Pretoria - While some learners and parents were excitedly returning to school last week, parents of learners at Lebogang Primary School in Ga-Rankuwa have been left in despair at the poor condition of the school. According to the local leadership and parents of the school located in the township north of Pretoria, even though parents closed down the school in October last year due to safety issues, nothing has changed. “In the meantime the learners should be placed in nearby primary schools,” said community member Kelebogile Tsele. Thabiso Legwete added: “I have lost all hope. It’s just sad that these kids are being denied their right to learning.” DA councillor Ofentse Madzebatela said that some of the safety issues raised by parents included a sinking classroom, and health and safety concerns due to the vandalised toilets. Madzebatela said that the school management had gone as far as consulting engineers who advised that the part of the school which was sinking was not safe for occupation. He said that the matter had been reported to the regional Education Department, which assured the community that they would attend to the issues raised and also send much-needed mobile classrooms to assist the school. In spite of it being four months later, Madzebatela said that the department had failed to deliver on any of the promises it made, even though they were aware schools were opening for the new academic year. “The department has placed these people between a rock and a hard place. “I’ve spoken to some of the parents and they’re not happy. “The circumstances are forcing them to choose whether their children stay at home and miss out on their education, or take the chance and let them go on an study in an unsafe environment. “They also don’t want to force neighbouring schools to take the children in as the fear this will lead to overcrowding and end with the schools attempting a rotation system to accommodate all the learners,” he explained. Madzebatela said that what was more heartbreaking for parents was that Gauteng Education MEC Matome Chiloane had recently opened a new school about 4km away from the dilapidated school. "The Department of Education in Gauteng has continued to play with the lives and futures of our children long enough; we hope that the MEC will not do as his predecessor did and play to the gallery, but really work to improve the condition of teaching and learning in Gauteng. “The DA calls on the MEC to act immediately and ensure that the mobile classes are prioritised,” he added. They should be closed completely, to reopen after changes were made and safety restored. The department was yet to respond to questions regarding the state of the school and concerns raised by the community. Pretoria News