Durban - The running fraternity in the country is mourning the death of one of its finest athletes, Grant Cummings, 51, of Kloof, Durban. Cummings, a practising lawyer at NSG Attorneys, died when he fell from the edge of a waterfall trail run at Giba Gorge, outside Durban, on Monday.  Medi Response, search-and-rescue teams and paramedics had to access the area on foot, but by the time they reached him, he had succumbed to his injuries. Cummings was a well-known athlete, having achieved silver in the Comrades Marathon on three occasions, and obtained his Green number (The Green number is for 10 or more completed Comrades Marathons or three wins or five gold medals).  He had also run the Two Oceans Marathon, among many other big races. Cummings was known for his charitable spirit, which drew in millions of rand for those in need.  He founded the Grant Cummings Trail Snakes, about eight years ago, at a time when trail running groups were not as popular as they are now. His brother, Michael, 49, said the family were devastated by his death. “He was an amazing dad and brother. He was always opinionated, so became a lawyer.  “I don’t think (his death) has really settled in yet. We have come to realise just how many lives Grant touched, and what an amazing running fraternity he came from. My grandfather used to run and Grant probably picked it up from him,” said Michael. Tony Lewis, a friend of Cummings and fellow runner, recalled one of his many fond memories of him.  “In 1996 our Varsity team entered our 10-man team to compete in the Great Train Race, which was a run-relay between Port Elizabeth and Loeries (57km). The relay race was always known to be hotly contested by national athletes across the various teams.  We didn’t win, nor did we beat the train, but we made memories to last a lifetime,“ Lewis said. Grant was also a member of the Pinetown Athletics & District Club. Lise Muchna, chairperson of the club and a friend, also had fond memories of Cummings. “Grant would go ahead of us and return for us and then go ahead again, all the while he wouldn’t stop talking, not once.  In a 10km run, he would do 15. He loved trail running. Cross-country was his passion,” she said. Grant’s funeral is expected to take place next weekend. He leaves his wife, Tennley, and three children, Nick, Rachel and Holly SUNDAY TRIBUNE