The term "telecommuting" was first used in 1973 by Jack Nilles to refer to a different type of work arrangement where employees complete duties that are typically performed at a primary or central workplace such as an office, elsewhere. After several decades, working from home has become commonplace, a trend that has recently been accelerated by the Covid-19 pandemic. Here are five unique ways to make money from the comfort of your own home: 1. Teach your native language A native language or mother tongue is one that you learned in your childhood and that you are fluent in and still speak. The importance of preserving our native languages cannot be understated. They allow us to communicate and connect with one another, and help us appreciate the intricacies of our shared history and that of our forebears. There is a huge market online to teach such languages. Simply advertise your services, sign up to language exchange apps, and you can make some extra cash. 2. Recording audio books The first recorded audio book was created in 1955. However, with the advent of technology, these have become more abundant and easily accessible. If you have a great voice that is easy on the ears, you can become a voice actor. This is a person whose job is to provide the voices for characters in audio books, animated films, dubbed foreign language films, and more. There are plenty of platforms online where you can you can offer your services. For this side hustle you will need to invest in recording equipment.  3. Dubbing  This side hustle is closely related to the one mentioned above.  Dubbing is the process of adding new dialogue or other sounds to the soundtrack of a movie, series, or documentary  that has already been shot.  It is used as a means of translating foreign-language content into the intended audience's language. 4. Customer service  A customer service agent is the first person customers communicate with when they have an issue with a service or product. This is a job that can be undertaken from anywhere; hence there are several international companies recruiting online for the role. In this position, you must handle complaints, give solutions to customers, and follow up to resolve any issues raised by the consumer. 5. Writing If you're gifted or skilled when it comes to writing, you can easily use this passion to make money. Writers can transform the most mundane of experiences into captivating, evocative, and thought provoking works. Numerous magazines offer money for submissions of everything from poetry and short stories to essays. IOL Business