Cape Town – The judge who sentenced convicted child killer and serial rapist Moehydien Pangaker in the Western Cape High Court on Tuesday described him as a danger to society, especially women and children. Judge Alan Maher described the 57-year-old man as deceitful, manipulative and cruel. Pangaker was convicted on 21 of 27 charges in October. The charges included eight counts of rape of children, sexual assault, sexual exploitation of children, several counts of assault on a child, kidnapping, incest, desecration of a corpse and absconding from parole. While Pangaker maintained his innocence throughout the trial, Judge Alan Maher did not mince his words when he delivered his judgment in October last year. Now, while delivering his sentences, Judge Maher said Pangaker had displayed no remorse for the many crimes he had committed while on parole. Pangaker has previous convictions ranging from 1981 to 2004. “His crimes are a hallmark of predatory behaviour. As the accused accepts no responsibilities for his crimes there is clearly no sign of rehabilitation. “He is deceitful, manipulative and cruel – and he cannot be placed back into society,” Judge Maher said. Pangaker made headlines when he was arrested for kidnapping, raping and murdering 8-year-old Tazne van Wyk. The girl, from Connaught Estate in Ravensmead, was last seen on February 7, 2020 after she left her home to buy a sucker lollipop at a shop, a few metres from her house. The child’s body was found in a stormwater drain, along the N1 highway in Worcester, 12 days later. Pangaker had pointed it out to the police. “After he kidnapped Tazne he had ample opportunity to change his mind. She died alone, away from her family in the dark and most probably in a lot of pain. “The CCTV footage where Tazne was last seen alive by anyone except the accused is chilling. This is a modal window. Beginning of dialog window. Escape will cancel and close the window. End of dialog window. “She shows no fear. The footage shows she trusts the accused and shows she was oblivious with no notion of the danger she was in. Such innocence. “The accused was not content on just raping, kidnapping and murdering her, but desecrated her body and discarded her in a stormwater drain. “The kidnapping of a child is every parent’s fear. From calls he received he knew how frantic her parents were and how angry the community was. His motive was purely sexual,” Judge Maher said. He said Pangaker poses a high, if not certain, risk of re-offending. “The viciousness, situations and circumstances and all offences were committed against defenceless victims. “He is a sexual predator who preys upon young children known to him,” Judge Maher said. Throughout proceedings, Pangaker kept his head down in the dock and the packed courtroom gallery saw people sitting on the edges of their seats. “Every murder is serious but the brutal and senseless murder of an 8-year-old girl, late at night, away from her family, must have been horrible and painful. The accused has a heart of darkness and the actions of the accused is proof thereof,” Judge Maher said. He went further, stating that Pangaker desecrating Tazne’s body by removing her left hand was an attempt to keep her identity hidden. Judge Maher said the multiple other rapes that Pangaker has been convicted of, in which victims were related to him, was an abuse of power. He also emphasised the importance of the courts to hand down heavy sentences to those perpetrating horrendous crimes as communities sought justice for the lives of those lost. “He is a dangerous and cunning criminal. Communities observe sentences imposed and in light of the increase in murders of young and innocent victims, the community craves the assistance of the court,” Judge Maher said. He said the outrage from the community regarding Tazne’s kidnapping, rape and murder was justifiable. Pangaker was sentenced to 259 and a half years in prison. The sentencing runs as follows as per the charge sheet: Count 1: Indecent assault - two years Count 2: Sexual exploitation - 18 months Count 3: Sexual exploitation - two years Count 4 : Assault - two years Count 6: Assault - 18 months Count 7: Rape - life imprisonment Count 8: Vaginal rape - life imprisonment Count 12: Vaginal rape - life imprisonment Count 13: Sexual assault - six months Count 14: Vaginal rape - life imprisonment Count 16: Rape - life imprisonment Count 17: Rape - life imprisonment Count 18: Rape - life imprisonment Count 19: Kidnapping - five years Count 21: -Incest - six years Count 22: Assault - three years Count 23: Kidnapping - seven years Count 24: Rape - life imprisonment Count 25: Murder - life imprisonment Count 26: Desecration of a body - two years Count 27: Breach of parole/absconding - two years Judge Maher deemed Pangaker a danger to society. It was also ordered that Pangaker’s name be entered into the National Sexual Offences Registry. As court adjourned there were loud cheers, screams and visible tears of joys in the gallery. Outside court, Tazne’s mother, Carmen van Wyk, attended proceedings with the baby she gave birth to a few months before. All Carmen said was: “I am happy with the outcome.” The spokesperson for the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA), Eric Ntabazalila, said the sentencing handed down was welcomed. “We are very, very satisfied with the sentence. We are really happy that finally the victims of the crimes, the heinous crimes committed by Pangaker, have received justice,” Ntabazalila said. Community activist Celestea Pierang, who was part of the search party for Tazne and attended every court appearance, was stunned and overwhelmed with emotion. “I have a whirlwind of emotions. As a community, we are happy, we are grateful. We are thankful for Judge Maher for the judgment and the sentencing he has done. “While the sentences run concurrently, we know he will never see the light of day. It’s nine life sentences,” she said. robin.francke@inl.co.za IOL