ABED Khan, a Durban grandfather, said it was a “great feeling” to be a part of the Proteas angling team that landed a medal at an international competition in Egypt last week. Khan, 60, who made his debut  for the Proteas at  the Orascom Development International Fishing Tournament  competition, held in El Gouna, was part of a 4-man team that finished as bronze medal winners. The other members of the Proteas team included Justin Paynter, the deputy principal at Crawford International North Coast, Douglas Dustan, also from KZN, and Frank de Oliviera (South Gauteng), who captained the team. Egypt’s ‘A’ Team were the competition's runaway winners of the 3-day event that began on February 14 and was a mix of bottom fishing, jigging and the game fishing disciplines. Italy edged into the silver medal position ahead of the Proteas. Khan’s dorado, which weighed 6.8kg, was one of the biggest catches in the tournament, and he was the leading angler in the Proteas team. “It took teamwork to land the bronze medal. It’s such a great feeling,” said Khan, who was overjoyed at achieving his lifelong dream of Protea colours in angling. He said the competition was challenging and gruelling because they had to fish for most of the day and into the night and only managed with a few hours each day. Khan said all 13 competing teams were given a boat with crew, and the skipper of their vessel was also a judge in the competition. After three days on the water, they returned to El Gouna for the weigh-in. “We were on top of the world when it was announced that we placed third. I think it was our collective years of experience that helped us to secure this achievement.” Nishaad Ibrahim, the South African Sport Anglers and Casting Confederation’s (SASAC) development and administration officer, was also in a jubilant mood. “The team has done well. It is a new facet of fishing, which required the team to fish overnight. It was the first time that a Proteas team has done an overnighter in a tournament. “It is a fantastic achievement, and we are proud of the lads,” Ibrahim said. Khan said the success in Egypt would go down as one of his best moments in angling, and he now looks forward to his trip to the US with another set of Proteas teammates for a competition that begins in Miami on March 20. In Miami, Khan and his team will be engaged in nearly two weeks of “light-tackle” angling, where they will target sail and game fish. SUNDAY TRIIBUNE