Durban - South Africans are keeping their fingers crossed for singer, songwriter, producer and DJ, Zakes Bantwini, who is hoping to pick up his first Grammy Award on Monday.  Zakes Bantwini, the self-confessed Ghetto King, whose real name is Zakhele Madida, jetted off to Los Angeles this week. If all goes well he will be joining the list of South African artists who own the gramophone trophy.  The ceremony will take place at the Crypto.com Arena in Los Angeles and will be hosted by South African comedian, Trevor Noah.  The song Bayethe has been nominated in the Best Global Music Performance category, dedicated to recording artists who have demonstrated excellence in the growing field of global music.  He shares the nomination for the single Bayethe with singer Nomcebo Zikode from Hammarsdale who featured in the song Jerusalema, as well as Wouter Kellerman, a flautist, producer and composer who won his first Grammy in 2014.  In this category they will be competing against Nigerian superstar Burna Boy, Ghanaian singer and songwriter Rocky Dawuni, Pakistani singer Arooj Aftab as well as American singer Matt B. Since his arrival in Los Angeles, Zakes Bantwini has been taking part in festivities that precede the Grammys.  On Tuesday he was invited to be part of the Global Music Panel at the Grammy Museum, discussing global music domination and African brands.  On the panel, he was joined by TV personality Anele Mdoda, the CEO of creative agency GridWorldwide Adam Byars, CEO and founder of the Bathu sneaker brand Theo Baloyi, as well as music executive Sibo Mhlungu. Zakes Bantwini described the experience as “nothing short of amazing”.  In November, Zakes Bantwini announced that he would be stepping back from the music industry after a successful 15 years to focus on other aspects of his life. He launched a recording studio in Cape Town, a rooftop bar called Rockefella and said he would also be focusing on his academic and philanthropic journeys. He released his last album titled Abantu with Universal Music.  The muso also walked away with the Musician of the Year award at the GQ hosted 2022 Men of The Year Awards in December.  At the time an excited Bantwini said: “This award means a lot to me, especially because it affirms the contribution l've made in the music industry.” Although Bantwini is celebrating his success, the year began on a tragic note for his family.  His father, Sihlangusile Jeffrey Khanyile, 65, died last month at his homestead in Nkandla, north of KZN. His family released a statement, saying they were devastated by the loss.  “We will miss his sense of humour, his resilience and how he always made sure we follow our culture. He will be deeply missed for his kindness and loving nature,” it said.  Zakes Bantwini’s wife, Nandi Madida, also paid tribute to her late father-inlaw, saying she was grateful for the kindness he had shown her as a young daughter-in-law.  The country is behind Zakes Bantwini and fans have shared their messages of support. Ntethelelo Bizanibonke Khanyile wished the DJ luck, saying he was deserving of the nomination. “This is what happens when preparation meets opportunity.  All the best, my brother,” he said. Jackson Mampintsha Mnisi advised Bantwini, “When you pick it (the trophy) up, just clap your hands.” Nomusa Biyela said, “Bring it home. We are proud of you and your accomplishments.” SUNDAY TRIBUNE