Durban — Deputy president David Mabuza has caused discontent among citizens after he announced – while attending his brother’s funeral in Mpumalanga – that he was stepping down. President Cyril Ramaphosa rejected his resignation and asked him to continue in his role to ensure a smooth transition. Mabuza was making way for Paul Mashatile. Presidential spokesperson Vincent Magwenya said Mabuza had made it clear that he wanted to step down after the ruling party members chose its new leaders at the December elective conference. “Ramaphosa has requested him to remain in his role until such time the modalities of his departure and transition have been finalised,” Magwenya stressed. Mabuza told mourners he had tendered his resignation letter to Ramaphosa last week. “I must step down to make space for the one that was elected by the conference because I see he has become a bit restless, so I am also rushing to give him space,” Mabuza had said. Weighing in on Mabuza’s now “shelved” resignation, political analyst Dr Levy Ndou said this was a long time coming, therefore people should not be surprised. Ndou said Mabuza was not elected into the National Executive Committee, the highest decision-making body of the ANC. “With the alignment of the ANC’s political seat and that of government, one should not be surprised. My suspicion is that there could have been a number of discussions between the ANC and Mabuza – based on the fact that Mabuza has previously saved the president’s political life.” At the 2017 elective conference, Mabuza came with the unity project in the ANC. In the last few minutes of the voting process he convinced Mpumalanga to vote for Ramaphosa. It was again Mabuza who in the elective conference in December chose not to contest any other position, even though nominated – because in the view of many people he wanted unity to prevail in the ANC, Ndou added. “One is therefore not surprised that he has finally resigned. I believe he is leaving his office with dignity – because if it was other people, they would have loved to stay on, until they are actually pushed, but Mabuza chose not to do so. “There could be other factors as well, relating to his health which has been an area of concern to many people – such as ordinary people and within his political party. And I think he leaves the government with all the necessary respect from his party and ordinary citizens of South Africa,” Ndou stressed. Political analyst Professor Sethulego Matebesi said the announcement at the funeral was uncalled for and tainted the office of the Presidency because of the manner in which it was done. “It should not have been leaked at such a forum and manner as it did.” National Freedom Party’s caucus leader Ahmed Munzoor Shaik Emam said the possibility of Paul Mashatile as deputy president would bring new energy and ideas to the Presidency. “Our support extends only so far as his willingness to fight corruption and put the people of South Africa first,” Shaik Emam stressed. Cope’s Dennis Bloem said Mabuza’s conduct was abnormal and unacceptable. “This is a very sad moment for South Africa where we hear the deputy president of a country announcing his intention to resign before he has actually done so at a funeral service. “We as the voters can never accept such a situation.” WhatsApp your views on this story to 071 485 7995. Daily News