Johannesburg – The DA Gauteng shadow MEC for education, Khume Ramulifho, has claimed that the Gauteng Department of Education (GDE) has misled the public by stating that all learners who applied for Grades 1 and 8 have been placed. Ramulifho said this information was incorrect because the DA in Gauteng is still inundated with calls, messages, and emails from parents who are desperate and uncertain if their children will ever be allocated to schools. "Some parents have opted for independent schools as they cannot sit and wait for the department while their children miss out on quality learning. Not all parents can afford private and independent schools, so many children are still sitting at home and are therefore denied the right to basic education," he said. This week, the department said all learners in the province had been placed, which means that the learners still waiting to be placed will not be allocated schools. "It is the department's responsibility to ensure that all children of school-going age are allocated to schools. However, the department failed to utilise the information given by parents when they changed jobs or moved from one residential area to another as a way to plan for the 2023 academic year," Ramulifho said. "The department's incompetence and failure to ensure learners' placement before the new academic year has created unnecessary pressure on parents who prefer sending their children to public schools." The DA urged the Gauteng MEC for Education, Matome Chiloane, to investigate all applications lodged and verify their placement instead of communicating incorrect information to the public. "The only solution to curb the late placement of learners is to review the online admission process to ensure that it is transparent, open, and fair. Appeals are not attended; they are rejected with a general standard message," Ramulifho said. The DA said it will forward all emails and messages from parents to the department to ensure that these children are placed as a matter of urgency as they miss out on much-needed learning time. The Star